# 1.03 - QObject - Subclassing

## The Meta-Object system

Qt's meta-object system provides the signals and slots mechanism for inter-object communication, run-time type information (RTTI), and the dynamic property system.

It is implemented with a three-part mechanism:

- `QObject` is the base class that all objects in the meta-object system inherit from.
- The `Q_OBJECT` macro is used to enable meta-object features when declared within a class definition.
- The Meta-Object Compiler (`moc`) will read the class definitions with the declared `Q_OBJECT` macro and produce the meta-object code.

## Briefly about Signals and Slots

Signals are emitted by an object when its internal state has changed in some way that might be interesting to the object's client or owner. Signals are public access functions and can be emitted from anywhere, but we recommend to only emit them from the class that defines the signal and its subclasses.

A slot is called when a signal connected to it is emitted. Slots are normal C++ functions and can be called normally; their only special feature is that signals can be connected to them.

Throughout this topic there will be mentions of signals and slots as they are deeply interconnected with objects in Qt. We will focus on the signals and slots later in Part 1, so all you need to know for now is that objects emit signals and that those signals connect to slots in other objects.

This topic will also introduce you to a couple of macros that will be of great importance for you when ever you are using signals and slots.

## The Qt Object Model and the QObject class

The `QObject` class is the base class of all Qt objects. It is the heart of the Qt Object Model. The central feature in this model is a very powerful mechanism for seamless object communication called signals and slots. You can connect a signal to a slot with `connect()` and destroy the connection with `disconnect()`. To avoid never ending notification loops you can temporarily block signals with `blockSignals()`. The protected functions `connectNotify()` and `disconnectNotify()` make it possible to track connections.

`QObject`s organize themselves in object trees. When you create a `QObject` with another object as parent, the object will automatically add itself to the parent's `children()` list. The parent takes ownership of the object; i.e., it will automatically delete its children in its destructor. You can look for an object by name and optionally type using `findChild()` or `findChildren()`.

Every object has an `objectName()` and its class name can be found via the corresponding `metaObject()` (see `QMetaObject::className()`). You can determine whether the object's class inherits another class in the `QObject` inheritance hierarchy by using the `inherits()` function.

When an object is deleted, it emits a `destroyed()` signal. You can catch this signal to avoid dangling references to `QObject`s.

Last but not least, `QObject` provides the basic timer support in Qt; see `QTimer` for high-level support for timers.

### The `Q_OBJECT` macro

The `Q_OBJECT` macro must appear in the private section of a class definition that declares its own signals and slots or that uses other services provided by Qt's meta-object system.

The `moc` tool reads a C++ header file. If it finds one or more class declarations that contain the `Q_OBJECT` macro, it produces a C++ source file containing the meta-object code for those classes. This meta-object code implements the underlying functionality needed for the runtime features.

Example:

```cpp
#include <QObject>

class Counter : public QObject
{
    Q_OBJECT

public:
    Counter() { m_value = 0; }
    int value() const { return m_value; }

public slots:
    void setValue(int value);

signals:
    void valueChanged(int newValue);

private:
    int m_value;
};
```

This macro requires the class to be a subclass of `QObject`. Use `Q_GADGET` instead of `Q_OBJECT` to enable the meta object system's support for enums in a class that is not a `QObject` subclass.

The `Q_GADGET` macro is a lighter version of the `Q_OBJECT` macro for classes that do not inherit from `QObject` but still want to use some of the reflection capabilities offered by `QMetaObject`. Just like the `Q_OBJECT` macro, it must appear in the private section of a class definition.

Notice that the `Q_OBJECT` macro is mandatory for any object that implements signals, slots or properties. You also need to run the Meta Object Compiler on the source file. We strongly recommend the use of this macro in all subclasses of `QObject` regardless of whether or not they actually use signals, slots and properties, since failure to do so may lead certain functions to exhibit strange behavior.
{: .note}

A `QObject` instance is said to have a thread affinity, or that it lives in a certain thread. When a `QObject` receives a queued signal or a posted event, the slot or event handler will run in the thread that the object lives in.

If a `QObject` has no thread affinity (that is, if `thread()` returns zero), or if it lives in a thread that has no running event loop, then it cannot receive queued signals or posted events.

### No Copy Constructor or Assignment Operator

`QObject` has neither a copy constructor nor an assignment operator. This is by design. Actually, they are declared, but in a private section with the macro `Q_DISABLE_COPY()`. In fact, all Qt classes derived from `QObject` (direct or indirect) use this macro to declare their copy constructor and assignment operator to be private. We will later discuss the reasoning behind this design under the topic 'Identity vs. Value'

The main consequence is that you should use pointers to `QObject` (or to your `QObject` subclass) where you might otherwise be tempted to use your `QObject` subclass as a value. For example, without a copy constructor, you can't use a subclass of `QObject` as the value to be stored in one of the container classes. You must store pointers.

### Auto-Connection

Qt's meta-object system provides a mechanism to automatically connect signals and slots between `QObject` subclasses and their children. As long as objects are defined with suitable object names, and slots follow a simple naming convention, this connection can be performed at run-time by the `QMetaObject::connectSlotsByName()` function.

### Dynamic Properties

Dynamic properties can be added to and removed from `QObject` instances at run-time. Dynamic properties do not need to be declared at compile-time, yet they provide the same advantages as static properties and are manipulated using the same API - using `property()` to read them and `setProperty()` to write them.

### Internationalization (I18n)

All `QObject` subclasses support Qt's translation features, making it possible to translate an application's user interface into different languages.

To make user-visible text translatable, it must be wrapped in calls to the `tr()` function. This is explained in detail in the [Writing Source Code for Translation](https://doc.qt.io/qt-5/i18n-source-translation.html) document.     

## The Property System

Qt provides a sophisticated [property system](http://doc.qt.io/qt-5/properties.html) similar to the ones supplied by some compiler vendors. However, as a compiler- and platform-independent library, Qt does not rely on non-standard compiler features like `__property` or `[property]`. The Qt solution works with any standard C++ compiler on every platform Qt supports. It is based on the Meta-Object System that also provides the signals and slots system. As mentioned in the start of this chapter, we will be further discussing object communication and singals/slots in a later chapter.

### Requirements for Declaring Properties

To declare a property, use the `Q_PROPERTY()` macro in a class that inherits `QObject`. Here is an example showing how to export member variables as Qt properties using the `MEMBER` keyword. Note that a `NOTIFY` signal must be specified to allow QML property bindings. We will talk more about QML in Part 2!

```cpp
Q_PROPERTY(QColor color MEMBER m_color NOTIFY colorChanged)
Q_PROPERTY(qreal spacing MEMBER m_spacing NOTIFY spacingChanged)
Q_PROPERTY(QString text MEMBER m_text NOTIFY textChanged)

...

signals:
    void colorChanged();
    void spacingChanged();
    void textChanged(const QString &newText);

private:
    QColor  m_color;
    qreal   m_spacing;
    QString m_text;
```

A property behaves like a class data member, but it has additional features accessible through the [Meta-Object System](http://doc.qt.io/qt-5/metaobjects.html).

The property declaration syntax has multiple keywords to specify the behaviour of the declared property. Here are the most relevant ones:

|-----------------------------|----------------|
| `READ`      | For reading the property value. Ideally a const function is used for this purpose, and it must return either the property's type or a const reference to that type. eg., `QWidget::focus` is a read-only property with READ function, `QWidget::hasFocus()`. Required if no `MEMBER` variable was specified. |
| `WRITE`     | For setting the property value. It must return void and must take exactly one argument, either of the property's type or a pointer or reference to that type. e.g., `QWidget::enabled` has the `WRITE` function `QWidget::setEnabled()`. Read-only properties do not need `WRITE` functions. e.g., `QWidget::focus` has no `WRITE` function. |
| `MEMBER`    | Required if no `READ` accessor function is specified. This makes the given member variable readable and writable without the need of creating `READ` and `WRITE` accessor functions. It's still possible to use `READ` or `WRITE` accessor functions in addition to `MEMBER` variable association (but not both), if you need to control the variable access.
| `RESET`     | Optional. For setting the property back to its context specific default value. e.g., `QWidget::cursor` has the typical `READ` and `WRITE functions`, `QWidget::cursor()` and `QWidget::setCursor()`, and it also has a `RESET` function, `QWidget::unsetCursor()`, since no call to `QWidget::setCursor()` can mean reset to the context specific cursor. The `RESET` function must return void and take no parameters. |
| `NOTIFY`    | Optional. If defined, it should specify one existing signal in that class that is emitted whenever the value of the property changes. `NOTIFY` signals for `MEMBER` variables must take zero or one parameter, which must be of the same type as the property. The parameter will take the new value of the property. The `NOTIFY` signal should only be emitted when the property has really been changed, to avoid bindings being unnecessarily re-evaluated in QML, for example. Qt emits automatically that signal when needed for `MEMBER` properties that do not have an explicit setter. |
| `USER`      | Attribute indicates whether the property is designated as the user-facing or user-editable property for the class. Normally, there is only one `USER` property per class (default false). e.g., `QAbstractButton::checked` is the user editable property for (checkable) buttons.

The property type can be any type supported by `QVariant`, or it can be a user-defined type. In this example, class `QDate` is considered to be a user-defined type.

```cpp
Q_PROPERTY(QDate date READ getDate WRITE setDate)
```

Because `QDate` is user-defined, you must include the `<QDate>` header file with the property declaration.

For historical reasons, `QMap` and `QList` as property types are synonym of `QVariantMap` and `QVariantList`.

### Reading and Writing Properties

A property can be read and written using the generic functions `QObject::property()` and `QObject::setProperty()`, without knowing anything about the owning class except the property's name. In the code snippet below, the call to `QAbstractButton::setDown()` and the call to `QObject::setProperty()` both set property "down".

```cpp
QPushButton *button = new QPushButton;
QObject *object = button;
button->setDown(true);
object->setProperty("down", true);
```

Accessing a property through its `WRITE` accessor is the better of the two, because it is faster and gives better diagnostics at compile time, but setting the property this way requires that you know about the class at compile time. Accessing properties by name lets you access classes you don't know about at compile time. You can discover a class's properties at run time by querying its `QObject`, `QMetaObject`, and `QMetaProperties`.

```cpp
QObject *object = ...
const QMetaObject *metaobject = object->metaObject();
int count = metaobject->propertyCount();
for (int i = 0; i < count; ++i) {
    QMetaProperty metaproperty = metaobject->property(i);
    const char *name = metaproperty.name();
    QVariant value = object->property(name);
    ...
}
```

In the above snippet, `QMetaObject::property()` is used to get metadata about each property defined in some unknown class. The property name is fetched from the metadata and passed to `QObject::property()` to get the value of the property in the current object.

### A Simple Example

Suppose we have a class MyClass, which is derived from `QObject` and which uses the `Q_OBJECT` macro in its private section. We want to declare a property in MyClass to keep track of a priority value. The name of the property will be priority, and its type will be an enumeration type named `Priority`, which is defined in MyClass.

We declare the property with the `Q_PROPERTY()` macro in the private section of the class. The required READ function is named priority, and we include a WRITE function named `setPriority`. The enumeration type must be registered with the Meta-Object System using the `Q_ENUM()` macro. 

The macro registers an enum type with the meta-object system. It must be placed after the enum declaration in a class that has the `Q_OBJECT` or the `Q_GADGET` macro. For namespaces use `Q_ENUM_NS()` instead.

For example:

```cpp
class MyClass : public QObject
{
    Q_OBJECT

public:
    MyClass(QObject *parent = 0);
    ~MyClass();

    enum Priority { High, Low, VeryHigh, VeryLow };
    Q_ENUM(Priority)
    void setPriority(Priority priority);
    Priority priority() const;
};
```

Enumerations that are declared with `Q_ENUM` have their `QMetaEnum` registered in the enclosing `QMetaObject`. You can also use `QMetaEnum::fromType()` to get the `QMetaEnum`.

Registered enumerations are automatically registered also to the Qt meta type system, making them known to `QMetaType` without the need to use `Q_DECLARE_METATYPE()`. This will enable useful features; for example, if used in a `QVariant`, you can convert them to strings. Likewise, passing them to `QDebug` will print out their names.

Registering an enumeration type makes the enumerator names available for use in calls to `QObject::setProperty()`. We must also provide our own declarations for the READ and WRITE functions. The declaration of MyClass then might look like this:

```cpp
class MyClass : public QObject
{
    Q_OBJECT
    Q_PROPERTY(Priority priority READ priority WRITE setPriority NOTIFY priorityChanged)

public:
    MyClass(QObject *parent = 0);
    ~MyClass();

    enum Priority { High, Low, VeryHigh, VeryLow };
    Q_ENUM(Priority)

    void setPriority(Priority priority)
    {
        m_priority = priority;
        emit priorityChanged(priority);
    }
    Priority priority() const { return m_priority; }

    signals:
        void priorityChanged(Priority);

    private:
        Priority m_priority;
};
```

The READ function is const and returns the property type. The WRITE function returns void and has exactly one parameter of the property type. The meta-object compiler enforces these requirements.

Given a pointer to an instance of MyClass or a pointer to a `QObject` that is an instance of MyClass, we have two ways to set its priority property:

```cpp
MyClass *myinstance = new MyClass;
QObject *object = myinstance;

myinstance->setPriority(MyClass::VeryHigh);
object->setProperty("priority", "VeryHigh");
```

In the example, the enumeration type that is the property type is declared in MyClass and registered with the Meta-Object System using the `Q_ENUM()` macro. This makes the enumeration values available as strings for use as in the call to `setProperty()`. Had the enumeration type been declared in another class, its fully qualified name (i.e., `OtherClass::Priority`) would be required, and that other class would also have to inherit `QObject` and register the enumeration type there using the `Q_ENUM()` macro.

A similar macro, `Q_FLAG()`, is also available. Like `Q_ENUM()`, it registers an enumeration type, but it marks the type as being a set of flags, i.e. values that can be OR'd together. An I/O class might have enumeration values `Read` and `Write` and then `QObject::setProperty()` could accept `Read | Write`. `Q_FLAG()` should be used to register this enumeration type.

### Dynamic Properties

`QObject::setProperty()` can also be used to add new properties to an instance of a class at runtime. When it is called with a name and a value, if a property with the given name exists in the `QObject`, and if the given value is compatible with the property's type, the value is stored in the property, and true is returned. If the value is not compatible with the property's type, the property is not changed, and false is returned. But if the property with the given name doesn't exist in the `QObject` (i.e., if it wasn't declared with `Q_PROPERTY()`), a new property with the given name and value is automatically added to the `QObject`, but false is still returned. This means that a return of false can't be used to determine whether a particular property was actually set, unless you know in advance that the property already exists in the `QObject`.

Note that dynamic properties are added on a per instance basis, i.e., they are added to `QObject`, not `QMetaObject`. A property can be removed from an instance by passing the property name and an invalid `QVariant` value to `QObject::setProperty()`. The default constructor for `QVariant` constructs an invalid `QVariant`.
{: .note}

Dynamic properties can be queried with `QObject::property()`, just like properties declared at compile time with `Q_PROPERTY()`.

### Properties and Custom Types

Custom types used by properties need to be registered using the `Q_DECLARE_METATYPE()` macro so that their values can be stored in `QVariant` objects. This makes them suitable for use with both static properties declared using the `Q_PROPERTY()` macro in class definitions and dynamic properties created at run-time.

### Adding Additional Information to a Class

Connected to the property system is an additional macro, `Q_CLASSINFO()`, that can be used to attach additional name--value pairs to a class's meta-object, for example:

`Q_CLASSINFO("Version", "3.0.0")`

Like other meta-data, class information is accessible at run-time through the meta-object; see `QMetaObject::classInfo()` for details.

## The Identity Type

The identity type derives from `QObject`. It extends C++ with many dynamic features using a meta-object system. It cannot be copied as the copy constructor and assignment operator equal to delete.

Examples include: `QWidget`, `QWindow`, `QApplication`, `QEventLoop`, `QThread`, `QFile`, `QTcpSocket`.

## Identity vs Value

Some of the added features listed above for the Qt Object Model, require that we think of Qt Objects as identities, not values. Values are copied or assigned; identities are cloned. Cloning means to create a new identity, not an exact copy of the old one. For example, twins have different identities. They may look identical, but they have different names, different locations, and may have completely different social networks.

Then cloning an identity is a more complex operation than copying or assigning a value. We can see what this means in the Qt Object Model.

A Qt object:

* might have a unique `QObject::objectName()`. If we copy a Qt Object, what name should we give the copy?
* has a location in an object hierarchy. If we copy a Qt Object, where should the copy be located?
* can be connected to other Qt Objects to emit signals to them or to receive signals emitted by them. If we copy a Qt Object, how should we transfer these connections to the copy?
* can have new properties added to it at runtime that are not declared in the C++ class. If we copy a Qt Object, should the copy include the properties that were added to the original?

For these reasons, Qt Objects should be treated as identities, not as values. Identities are cloned, not copied or assigned, and cloning an identity is a more complex operation than copying or assigning a value. Therefore, `QObject` and all subclasses of `QObject` (direct or indirect) have their copy constructor and assignment operator disabled.


******

## Exercise - 04_CustomContainer
Create a class `Student` that has the student's name as `QString` and amount of study credits as integer.

Student should have `setName(QString)` and `setCredits(int)` as well as the respective getters.

Remember to declare `Student` as a meta-type so you can add them to your container.

In `custom.cpp` implement functions defined in the header file.
* `addStudent` to add students in the `studentMap` container. Use `int` studentNumber as the key in the container.
*  `findByCredits` that iterates over the container and returns a list of all names who have >= credits.
*  `removeDivisibleStudents` that removes all students with a student number that is divisible by N from the container.
*  `countStudentsStartingWith` that counts the amount of students with a name starting with char n.
     
******

## Checklist for chapter 1.03

**Beginner**

* What is a macro?
* What is preprocessing?
* What are value types

**Intermediate**

* What is the QObject class?
* What is the Meta-Object System?
* What is the Qt Object Model (does this belong here?)?
* What is the Q_OBJECT macro?
* What does subclassing mean in the context of Qt?
* What is the Property system?
* How do you declare a Property?
* How does a Property behave?
* How do you read and write Properties?
* What is the Q_ENUM macro?
* What are identity types?
* How do value types compare to identity types?
* How do identity types compare to value types?

**Expert**

* What is the Meta Object Compiler?
* Object introspection using the meta-object?

***
