// Input handlers ois hyvä otsikko

// Alku on hyvä, mutta ottakaa heti myös Inout Handleristit mukaan. Ne oli ennen Pointer Handlers, mutta 5.12 alkaen Inout Handlersejä

# 3.06 - Input Handlers

// Possibly to be merged with the last chapter 3.04

Qt Quick has multiple types that can handle touch events:

- [MouseArea](https://doc.qt.io/qt-5/qml-qtquick-mousearea.html): the basic mouse interaction handler
- [PinchArea](https://doc.qt.io/qt-5/qml-qtquick-pincharea.html): handles two-finger scaling, rotation and dragging
- [MultiPointTouchArea](https://doc.qt.io/qt-5/qml-qtquick-multipointtoucharea.html): declared touchpoints can be bound to items
- [Flickable](https://doc.qt.io/qt-5/qml-qtquick-flickable.html): surface that can be moved with a fast stroke

These items have some issues due to [architectural decisions](http://blog.qt.io/blog/2017/11/23/say-hello-qt-quick-pointer-handlers/) in Qt and Qt Quick. The issue with `MouseArea` is that Qt assumes there is only one mouse, "core pointer" and `QMouseEvent` and `QTouchEvents` are considered the same events inside Qt Quick. The result is that you cannot interact with two `MouseArea`s or `Flickable`s at the same time. With our previous `MouseArea` usecases this means that you cannot press two `Button`s at the same time or drag two `Slider`s a the same time, for example. This also means that you cannot use `PinchArea` and `MouseArea` together, as when `PinchArea` is active it wont pass the events to the `MouseArea`.

// Name change in 5.12 to Input Handlers. Ehkei kannata edes mainita Pointer Handlersejä enää

To fix the issue, Qt introduced the new **Pointer Handler** types in Qt 5.10 technology preview! Pointer Handlers can be declared inside any `Item` type and they can handle events from any pointing devices on behalf of the `parent`. They are very lightweight types, they are intended to be declared as a handler for each interaction type there might exist. Each `Item` can have unlimited `Handler` types, so you wont run out of them.

You can declare constraints on what kind of interaction the handler is going to react on, whether it is a touch event, mouse button or a modifier key is active. This is done with the properties `acceptedButtons` and `acceptedDevices` where one can select the accepted [`Qt::MouseButton`](http://doc.qt.io/qt-5/qt.html#MouseButton-enum)s or the accepted pointer devices like `PointerDevice.Mouse`, `PointerDevice.Stylus` or `PointerDevice.TouchScreen`.

To use these new experimental handlers, we need to import from `Qt.labs.handlers 1.0`. There are multiple handlers implemented in [Qt 5.10](http://doc-snapshots.qt.io/qt5-5.10/qt-labs-handlers-qmlmodule.html), we are going to go through a few of them here.

`TapHandler` is comparable to `MouseArea` with a few key differences:

```qml
import Qt.labs.handlers 1.0

Item {
    TapHandler {
        acceptedDevices: PointerDevice.Mouse | PointerDevice.Stylus
        onTapped: console.log("left clicked")
    }
    
    TapHandler {
        acceptedDevices: PointerDevice.TouchScreen
        onTapped: console.log("tapped")
    }
    
    TapHandler {
        acceptedButtons: Qt.RightButton
        onTapped: console.log("right clicked")
    }
}
```
We can now accept events from specific devices and react accordingly. As mentioned, there can be also multiple `TapHandlers` active inside the same `Item`.

`DragHandler` is similar to the `MouseArea` `drag` property, but more straightforward to use. It has the similar `xAxis` and `yAxis` [property groups](http://doc-snapshots.qt.io/qt5-5.10/qml-qt-labs-handlers-draghandler.html#xAxis-prop) as the `MouseArea`: 

```qml
import Qt.labs.handlers 1.0

Rectangle {
    width: 50
    height: 50
    color: "green"
    
    DragHandler {
        yAxis.enabled: false
    }
}
```

There is also a `PointHandler` which can be used to track a touch point:

```qml
import Qt.labs.handlers 1.0

Item {
    id: root

    PointHandler {
        id: handler
        acceptedDevices: PointerDevice.Mouse | PointerDevice.Stylus
        target: Rectangle {
            parent: root
            color: "blue"
            visible: handler.active
            x: handler.point.position.x - width / 2
            y: handler.point.position.y - height / 2
            width: 20
            height: width
            radius: width / 2
        }
    }

}

```

When a press event occurs, the handler will choose a point that has not been bound to any other handlers. It will check if the constraints given (`acceptedDevices` etc.) are satisfied and it is eligible for the point. It will then track the point with the property `active` as `true` until release. Like other handlers, it has the `target` property where we have placed an `Rectangle` and bound the handler properties.

***

// Harjoitus. Ainakin macOS:ssä laatta hiiri tuee 2+ inputEventtiä, en tiedä tukeeko Windows
