# 2.07 - Components: Properties, Signals

### QML Components

We have been previously using components in the material and exercises, but have not gone through how and why components are used in general. The definition of a component is it is an instantiable QML definition, a QML type. It is typically contained inside its own `.qml` file. For example, a `Button` component is defined in a file `Button.qml`. We can instantiate this `Button` component to create `Button` objects. A component may also be defined inside a `Component` item.

The `Button` definition may contain other components. The `Button` component could use a `Text` element, a `MouseArea` and other elements to implement the internal functions. This compounding of different components to form new components (and effectively new interfaces) is key in good, reusable UI components.

Let's walk through an example of a color picker for choosing the color of a text element. Our picker is currently made of four cells with different colors. A very naive approach is to write multiple `Item`s with `Rectangle` and `MouseArea` items inside the main application.

```qml
Rectangle {
    id: page
    width: 500
    height: 200
    color: "black"

    Text {
        id: helloText
        text: "Hello world!"
        y: 30
        anchors.horizontalCenter: page.horizontalCenter
    }

    Grid {
        id: colorPicker
        x: 4; anchors.bottom: page.bottom; anchors.bottomMargin: 4
        rows: 2; columns: 3; spacing: 3

        Item {
            width: 40
            height: 25

            Rectangle {
                id: rectangle
                color: "red"
                anchors.fill: parent
            }

            MouseArea {
                anchors.fill: parent
                onClicked: helloText.color = "red"
            }
        }          
        // Imagine more duplicate lines of Items with different color values defined...
    }
}
```

Smart people will probably notice that we have lots of duplicate code here! Additionally, to add more colors, we need to define more elements with just the color values changed. To avoid writing the same code over and over again for each color, we can extract a `Cell` *component* from the duplicate code to `Cell.qml`.

Here is our component definition with `Rectangle` and `MouseArea` items extracted:

```qml
Item {
    id: container
    width: 40; height: 25

    Rectangle {
        id: rectangle
        color: "red"
        anchors.fill: parent
    }

    MouseArea {
        anchors.fill: parent
        onClicked: console.log("clicked?")
    }
}
```

Usually components are defined with the `Item` type as the root item. Now we have insatiable component, but currently it is a component without outside effects and it has a hardcoded color value. This is not very reusable, isn't it? How to make it reusable and interact with other items?

We cannot access the `text` property of our `Text` item `helloText` inside our component and we cannot access the `rectangle.color` property outside of the `Cell` component.
To do this, we need to expose an *interface* for other components to use. We can use the `property` keyword `alias` and the attribute `signal` to expose functionality.

```qml
Item {
    id: container
     
    property alias cellColor: rectangle.color
    signal clicked(color cellColor)
     
    width: 40; height: 25

    Rectangle {
        id: rectangle
        anchors.fill: parent
    }

    MouseArea {
        anchors.fill: parent
        onClicked: container.clicked(container.cellColor)
    }
}
```
 
Now we can write to the `rectangle.color` property outside from the component with the property `cellColor`, and we can install a *signal handler* for the `clicked` signal with the `onClicked` property:

```qml
Cell {
    cellColor: "red"
    onClicked: helloText.color = cellColor
}
```

Now we can easily add more colors with just the `Cell` definition:

```qml
Rectangle {
    id: page
    width: 500
    height: 200
    color: "black"

    Text {
        id: helloText
        text: "Hello world!"
        y: 30
        anchors.horizontalCenter: page.horizontalCenter
    }

    Grid {
        id: colorPicker
        x: 4; anchors.bottom: page.bottom; anchors.bottomMargin: 4
        rows: 2; columns: 2; spacing: 3

        Cell { cellColor: "red"; onClicked: helloText.color = cellColor }
        Cell { cellColor: "green"; onClicked: helloText.color = cellColor }
        Cell { cellColor: "blue"; onClicked: helloText.color = cellColor }
        Cell { cellColor: "yellow"; onClicked: helloText.color = cellColor }
    }
}
```

### Exercise - CustomSignals

Your task is to implement a simple checkbox component with a couple of signals and some logic. The type you will be working with is in `CustomCheckbox.qml`

Make some sort of visual change when checking/unchecking the checkbox, change picture or text

Create custom signal 'checked' that will emit:
- true when the checkbox is checked
- false when unchecked

Expose property 'checkMax' that will be used as the inclusive upper bound of the number checks
- Disable the checkbox after it has been checked the defined number of times, meaning that the checkbox should not allow any further input from the user
- If checkCount is not defined, allow infinite checks

Create a signal named 'disabled' that will emit after the checkbox has been disabled

- Use the 'state' property of the parent 'checkBox'
- The states are 'checked', 'unchecked' and "disabled"

Optional extra: you can use these states to animate the visual change of the checkbox!

***

### Checklist for chapter 2.07

**Beginner**

* What does a QML file define?

**Intermediate**

* What four rules define your property scope (included from 2.12)?
* How can I instantiate a type that has been defined in a QML file?
* How do you define a component API?
* What is a visibility of an item id?
* When to use alias with a property?
* When to use readonly with a property?
* when to use default with a property?
* How to define a private API?

***
