# 2.03 - Parent-Child relationship

## The Object Tree

// The chapter is shortest so far, but I think it's  clear enough. We could consider making it more thorough, but it might risk just being more hard to follow. Not sure. -Jan

`QObject`s organize themselves in object trees. When you create a `QObject` with another object as parent, it's added to the parent's `children()` list, and is deleted when the parent is. It turns out that this approach fits the needs of GUI objects very well. For example, a `QShortcut` (keyboard shortcut) is a child of the relevant window, so when the user closes that window, the shortcut is deleted too.

`QQuickItem`, the basic visual element of the Qt Quick module which we'll discuss in later parts of the course, inherits from `QObject`, but has a concept of the visual parent which differs from that of the `QObject` parent. An item's visual parent may not necessarily be the same as its object parent. See [Concepts - Visual Parent in Qt Quick](https://doc.qt.io/qt-5/qtquick-visualcanvas-visualparent.html) for more details.

You can also delete child objects yourself, and they will remove themselves from their parents. For example, when the user removes a toolbar it may lead to the application deleting one of its `QToolBar` objects, in which case the toolbar's `QMainWindow` parent would detect the change and reconfigure its screen space accordingly.

## Object and pointer permanence

When `QObjects` are created on the heap (i.e., created with `new`), a tree can be constructed from them in any order, and later, the objects in the tree can be destroyed in any order. When any `QObject` in the tree is deleted, if the object has a parent, the destructor automatically removes the object from its parent. If the object has children, the destructor automatically deletes each child. No `QObject` is deleted twice, regardless of the order of destruction.

When `QObjects` are created on the stack, the same behavior applies. Normally, the order of destruction still doesn't present a problem. Consider the following snippet:

```cpp
int main()
{
    QWidget window;
    QPushButton quit("Quit", &window);
    ...
}
```
     
The parent (window), and the child (quit) are both `QObject`s because `QPushButton` inherits `QWidget`, and `QWidget` inherits `QObject`. This code is correct: the destructor of quit is not called twice because the C++ language standard (ISO/IEC 14882:2003) specifies that destructors of local objects are called in the reverse order of their constructors. Therefore, the destructor of the child, quit, is called first, and it removes itself from its parent, window, before the destructor of window is called.

But now consider what happens if we swap the order of construction, as shown in this second snippet:

```cpp
int main()
{
    QPushButton quit("Quit");
    QWidget window;

    quit.setParent(&window);
    ...
}
```

In this case, the order of destruction causes a problem. The parent's destructor is called first because it was created last. It then calls the destructor of its child, quit, which is incorrect because quit is a local variable. When quit subsequently goes out of scope, its destructor is called again, this time correctly, but the damage has already been done.

To summarize:

* Tree can be constructed in any order 
* Tree can be destroyed in any order 
* if object has parent: object first removed from parent 
* if object has children: deletes each child first
* No object is deleted twice 

Please note that Parent-child relationship is NOT the same things as inheritance.

## The Dangling Pointer Probelm

The object tree does not solve the dangling pointer problem, but [QPointer](http://doc.qt.io/qt-5/qpointer.html) provides a guarded pointer for `QObject`. When the referenced object is destroyed, it sets the pointer to 0. It's be easy to mix guarded and normal pointers. The guarded pointer is automatically cast to the pointer type.

Qt objects may also notify observers just before their destruction.

## Exercise - Playing around with the object tree

This exercise will be mostly for the student to play around with the concept of parents and children. It will not be automatically tested by TMC, but peer-reviewed instead. Detailed description to follow.

***