# 2.07 - Re-usable Components

To this point, we have been making standalone components, but now we are going to see how to integrate them in to a user facing application with navigation, layout and styling.

Components are typically added to a root [`Window`](https://doc.qt.io/qt-5/qml-qtquick-window-window.html) which acts as the top-level interface for user. There also exists an extended [`ApplicationWindow`](https://doc.qt.io/qt-5/qml-qtquick-controls2-applicationwindow.html) which contains convenient methods to add frequently used UI items to the window. It also provides an interface to control the the window's properties, appearance and layout from within QML.

[`ApplicationWindow`](https://doc.qt.io/qt-5/qml-qtquick-controls2-applicationwindow.html) contains item properties that can be populated with any `Item` or with ready-made containers such as `ToolBar` or `TabBar`. The `header` and `footer` items are positioned at the top and the bottom of the window, respectively.

```qml
import QtQuick.Controls 2.3

ApplicationWindow {
    visible: true

    header: ToolBar {
        // ...
    }

    footer: TabBar {
        // ...
    }

    StackView {
        anchors.fill: parent
    }
}
```

As previously discussed with making generic `Component`s, it is not preferable to reference the id of the application root elements as this creates dependencies to other items. `ApplicationWindow` provides these generic properties create a interface to itself without creating a dependency to a certain window id.

### TODO: explain content item

***


## Exercise for chapter 2.07

***

## Checklist for chapter 2.07

### Beginner

* What is a component?

### Intermediate

* What is a content item?
* What other properties should be made visible from the component?
* How to define the header?
* How to define the footer?
