# 5.01 - QML Context Properties and Objects

In Part 5 we'll learn how to integrate C++ and QML. In most cases this means accessing C++ from QML, and it will be our focus. It is also possible to access QML objects from C++, but generally this is not what you want to do, except perhaps for testing purposes, so we're not going into that here.

All communication between C++ and QML happens via the Qt Meta-Object System.
* Signals & Slots can be connected
* Properties can be accessed and modified
* C++ slots and methods marked as `Q_INVOKABLE` can be called from QML
* Enumerations registered with `Q_ENUM` can be accessed from QML

## QML Context

C++ objects and values can be embedded directly into the context of loaded QML objects using *context properties* and *context objects*. This is achieved through the `QQmlContext` class provided by the `Qt QML` module, which exposes data to the context of a QML component, allowing data to be injected from C++ into QML.

Each `QQmlContext` contains a set of properties, distinct from its `QObject` properties, that allow data to be explicitly bound to a context by name. 

Contexts form a hierarchy, the root of which is the QML engine's root context. The root context is automatically created by the `QQmlEngine`. Data that should be available to all QML component instances instantiated by the engine should be put in the root context. Additional data that should only be available to a subset of component instances should be added to sub-contexts parented to the root context. Child contexts inherit the context properties of their parents; if a child context sets a context property that already exists in its parent, the new context property overrides that of the parent.

### Context Properties

You can expose context properties with the `setContextProperty` method. It's possible to expose both value types supported by `QVariant`, and pointers to `QObject`s. The former simply exposes the value you set to be available by the property name, while the latter exposes the object itself.

For example:

```cpp
// main.cpp
#include <QGuiApplication>
#include <QQmlApplicationEngine>
#include <QQmlContext>
#include <QColor>

int main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    QGuiApplication app(argc, argv);
    QQmlApplicationEngine engine;

    QQmlContext* context = engine.rootContext();
    context->setContextProperty("myBackgroundColor", QColor(Qt::yellow));
    context->setContextProperty("myText", "I'm text from C++!");
    
    context->setContextProperty("application", &app);

    engine.load(QUrl(QStringLiteral("qrc:/main.qml")));
    if (engine.rootObjects().isEmpty())
        return -1;
    
    return app.exec();
}
```

```qml
// main.qml
import QtQuick 2.9
import QtQuick.Window 2.3

Window {
    width: 640; height: 480; visible: true

    Rectangle {
        objectName: "rectangle"
        width: 200; height: 100
        color: myBackgroundColor

        Text {
            id: textField
            anchors.centerIn: parent
            font.pixelSize: 18
            text: myText
        }

        MouseArea {
            anchors.fill: parent
            onClicked: {
                application.quit();
            }
        }
    }
}
```

Here, we exposed the values named "myBackgroundColor" and "myText", which are then simply available in QML by the property name.

We also exposed the view itself as "application" allowing us to quit the app. Note that this is just for the sake of an example! Normally we'd use `Qt.quit()`, but this demonstrates how to call slots from QML. We'll talk more about exposing and using C++ objects in QML in the next chapter.

### Context Objects

To simplify binding and maintaining larger data sets, all the properties of an object can be exposed with `setContextObject`. All the properties of the context object are available by name in the context, as though they were all individually set with `setContextProperty`.

Note that *this is distinct from exposing an object with `setContextProperty`*. When you expose an object with `setContextProperty` the object itself is available in QML, like in the previous example with "application". When you expose an object with `setContextObject` only the properties of the context are available, as previously stated.

Also note that all properties explicitly added with `setContextProperty` take precedence over the context object's properties.

For example:

```cpp
// myclass.h
#include <QObject>
#include <QColor>
class MyClass : public QObject
{
    Q_OBJECT
    Q_PROPERTY(QColor myColor MEMBER m_color NOTIFY colorChanged)
    Q_PROPERTY(QString myText MEMBER m_text NOTIFY textChanged)

public:
    explicit MyClass(QObject* parent = nullptr);

signals:
    void colorChanged();
    void textChanged(const QString &newText);

private:
    QColor m_color;
    QString m_text;
};


// main.cpp
context->setContextObject(&myClass);
```